Good to see you again.
In this video, you're going to
learn about cosine similarity,
which is another type
of similarity function.
It's basically makes use of the cosine
of the angle between two vectors.
And based off that, it tells you
whether two vectors are close or not.
In this section, you will see
the problem of using euclidean distance,
especially when comparing vector
representations of documents or corpora,
and how the cosine similarity metric
could help you overcome that problem.
To illustrate how the euclidean
distance might be problematic,
let's take the following example.
Suppose that you are in a vector space
where the corpora are represented by
the occurrence of the words disease and
eggs.
Here is the representation
of a Food corpus and
Agriculture corpus and the History corpus.
Each one of these corpora have
text related to that subject.
But you know that the word totals in
the corpora differ from one another.
In fact, the agriculture and the history
corpus have a similar number of words,
while the Food corpus has
a relatively small number.
Let's define the euclidean
distance between the food and
the Agriculture corpus as d1.
And let the euclidean distance between the
agriculture and the History corpus be d2.
As you can see, the distance d2
is smaller than the distance d1,
which would suggest that
the agriculture and
history corpora are more similar than
the agriculture and food corpora.
Another common method for
determining the similarity between vectors
is computing the cosine
of their inner angle.
If the angle is small,
the cosine would be close to one.
And as the angle approaches 90 degrees,
the cosine approaches zero.
As you can see here,
the angle alpha between food and
agriculture is smaller than the angle
beta between agriculture and history.
In this particular case,
the cosine of those angles is a better
proxy of similarity between these
vector representations than
their euclidean distance.
Now, you're familiar with
the main intuition behind the use
of the cosine similarity as a metric to
compare the similarity between two vector
representations.
Remember that the main advantage of
this metric over the euclidean distance
is that it isn't biased by the size
difference between the representations.
Soon, you'll get the chance to
actually calculate this metric.